And what's your specialty in political science?
Public administration, which is... What's your
field? Geography. Well, it's a long story. I'll
turn this off in a minute, and then I'll tell you all
mine. Well, the reason I ask what your field is, pub
ed is kind of a... It's a hybrid. On the one hand,
it's a kind of intellectual activity with...
epistemological concerns, you know, and
philosophical concerns. And then there's a great
deal of grubby how-to kind of thing. And so it's not
a specialty that turns undergraduate or graduate
students on, you know. And so I always feel a bit
apologetic for it, you know, because there's so
much more exciting things, so many more exciting
things to study in political science than I
thought I had. But somehow it was impressed on me
very early that... One of the fields they always
need people in in public political science is pub
ad, and I suppose as a result of employment
experience, all this kind of thing, I'd always
been kind of practically argumentative. So this
would explain that. I suppose if I had that to do
over again, I could be assured of a job, I would have
as my specialty normative political theory,
because here you read all the good literature, you
have sexy things to talk about. But at that time,
there just was no demand for people to teach
normative theory. Well, why political science?
Can you think of any reason why you got involved in
that? Well, I've always liked history. I've read a
great deal of history. I like literature. I'm an
undergraduate minor. I have an undergraduate
minor in English literature and more in
economics, major political science. I've always
liked to read. And I think it's just probably
similar to hundreds of thousands, perhaps, who
were turned on by a professor. And in this case, the
professor was not particularly charismatic.
Certainly not a dynamic speaker or a magnetic
personality, very matter-of-factly, but he
interested me in subject matter, and it was sort of
a cumulative process. You know, I got interested
in it and would take more of it, got more interested
in it. And Utah State, where I finished my
undergraduate work, had a very small political
science department. I think there were only three
people, but they were first-rate as teachers and
as researchers. And it was just a very happy
experience, and the same thing carried through my
entire graduate experience. So it was just, you
know, a fortuitous series of events. It was when
you finished your doctorate that you went to Peru?
No, I taught for, I got my first teaching job at
Colorado College in Colorado Springs, and I
taught there from 62 until 67. When I went to Peru,
and I came back to the college, and then left in 68.
But I had taught for five years. And came here? Did
you come here? No, it's long story. I resigned in 68
from Colorado College. I went to the University of
Denver for two years. I went to Memphis State
University for two years, and then I came here.
Don't ask me why, because it's terribly
self-seeking. You know, a perfect opportunity.
And you've been here for? I came here in September.
In this city? Yes, this is my first. I completed my
first.
And you were first in Mexico, in Juarez, after
coming here. Yes, I was interviewed here a year
ago, January, and Ed took me over to Corona. It was
the first time, basically. I've been back often,
and Polly and I want to go down, and I've almost
convinced myself that I am going to go to La
Veracruz. I know I have family there. But I keep
dragging my feet. I can't really explain why. You
know, I make up all sorts of convenient excuses
that, you know, I have to work this summer, or
Bobby's got to go to camp. At least I knew why I'm
reluctant to go back. That's interesting. How did
you react to Juarez? Very well, very well. I was
delighted by the Spanish, you know, and the
culture. I was used to the poverty already as a
result of being in South America. And this is just
the condition, the fact of life. I'm hauled by it.
There's very little I can do about it. The poverty,
the extremes of wealth. But I don't think the
stereotypic response of being appalled by the
dirt, this kind of thing, I suppose it's part of my
culture. I am delighted to be here. It's a delight
to go to the Union and hear Spanish spoken.
delightful community to speak Spanish with my
students, of the diet. Maybe this is why I feel a
little strong compulsion to get to Mexico, in the
sense of going down, because so much of it is here.
What is your perception of Mexico? Do you think of
it as a relatively dynamic country right now? What
do you feel about the revolution? Do you think
it... Yeah, I think that as far as I'm concerned,
it's the first genuine social revolution that
we've ever seen. even more genuine than French,
because they substituted one regime with another
dictatorship. I think that it's really the
unfortunate thing about the Mexican Revolution
is that it happened in a small country. It was
ultimately powerless. And it's gotten no press,
which is worse than a bad press, and therefore
nobody knows about it. And so to this extent, I
think that Mexico's revolution as a contribution
has been overlooked. And it's only been recently
with the scholarship of Womack, for example,
people are regarding the Mexican revolution
seriously. But even in South America, they don't
think of the Mexican revolution as a model. They
think of Castro's revolution as a model. It's very
interesting. My previous students, anyhow. And
this is why I say I think they've got no press as
opposed to a bad press or a good press. But I'm very
prideful of the Mexican Revolution, because it
was, in my job, the first genuine social
revolution. And I'm very prideful of the heroes
that emerged. I think a great deal of this is
romanticizing.
But this is a latter-day acquisition. I think not
until I was about 35 or 36 did I really feel
confident enough to face up to my own background in
America. I'm not really apologetic for it. I can't
justify it. But I do try to reason with myself and
say it's understandable, given the conditions
under which you were brought up, to react in this
way. Sort of just make the whole thing invisible.
But do you have any sense of the amount of, say,
socioeconomic progress made in Mexico, say, in
the last 15 or 20 years? This would be
intellectual, on my part, rather than
experiential firsthand. And I think that there is
considerable in that. There isn't the starvation
that my mother used to talk about, except for the
Indians, perhaps, in isolated areas. There's not
the brutalization that there was. The Urales, for
example, don't kill half the countryside at will.
without retribution. So I think in this sense,
there's been a quantum leap. Now, if you measure
the advances they've made, say, compared to the
advances that the industrialized nations of the
North made, well, they're still dragging behind.
Well, do you think of Mexico as being essentially
an urban industrial nation or approaching that
point? I think of it as being mixed. I wish I could
label it in one of Rob Stout's seven stages, but I
don't. I think that it is industrialized in the key
industries, petroleum, railroad, what else,
mining. But I also see a great deal of agriculture
providing the livelihood for thousands of
people. And so to that extent, I think that it's
still approaching the stage of
industrialization in the modern Western
American, Japanese sense of the word.
But I think that... that there has been a
demonstrable increase in the quantity and
quality of life. I was reading something, I can't
remember where, just in the past week, that we
really don't have a regular starvation in the
world anymore, with the exception of India,
perhaps. But the person was arguing that instead
of being pessimistic and saying we're really in
very bad shape, we should face up to the fact that we
don't have the families, we don't have the
scourges of the past, We've really come a long way
in the sense of medical advances, dietary
advances. And so if you use this as an index, it
would seem that Mexico would qualify as making
this sort of quantum jump.
I can't give an example firsthand. But I get the
idea that while people have to work very hard in
Mexico, and that their diet isn't what it might be,
this is still better than the misery that was there
when my parents were growing up there, when people
would starve to death. What about the class
system? To what extent do you think of Mexico as
being a nation with a strong middle class? I don't
think it's got a strong middle class. I think it's
got a strong upper class, even though I have a
colleague in the department who is Mexican
national who denies this and says, well, this is my
imagination.
No, I don't know whether this, my reaction comes
from my reading of Mexico, my experience in South
America, but I have a feeling that in the countries
I've been in Mexico, which we just did, or Mexico
and Peru, is that there's a very, very strong upper
class orientation in the sense that the upper
class dictates morals, mores, manners. Would you
compare Mexico with Peru in this sense? Not in this
sense, because Peru, at the time I was there, Now,
you've got to remember that Alvarado has been
there since, and he's changed things quite a bit. I
said Alvarado, I meant Velazquez in Peru. And so
there may be a diminution or dilution of the class
structure since Alvarado was there just five
years ago. But I still see very strong overtones of
this. For example, in restaurants in Mexico, I see
the... In Juarez. Juarez, yes. I think here at El
Paso, you know, I see a very patronizing attitude
on the part of educated Mexicans to their
compatriots, you know, who are clerics, mediums,
whatever. So this is what I'm basing my impression
on. And I feel a certain amount of this towards me.
Now, I have a colleague here, his name is Leonardo.
And as you can imagine, we chat frequently about
these things. And one of the things we noted is that
there is a tendency on the part of Mexicans to look
down on Mexican-Americans who are in Mexico, even
if the Mexican-Americans are professional, as he
and I are. And there's Néstor Valencia, who is a man
in local government. He's known the same thing.
And I think these impressions which we have
experienced have convinced us that although you
can't perhaps quantify this in an empirical
study, that there is a definite class, upper class
bias in Mexico, in my experience, which I think is
acting as a governor, inhibitor, or retarder of
the revolution to the extent that they see their
own purpose as being endangered by too much
democratization or too much redistribution of
wealth. Have you ever run into many Mexican
nationals who talk of themselves as clase media
and who take tremendous pride in being middle
class? You haven't encountered much of this. No,
because I think that the people who are
professionals still consider themselves
members of the Catholic media, but members of the
upper class. Jose Luis, for example. He may be,
indeed, upper class. You would agree with Richard
Adams, one of my old professors.
He just says the upper class keeps getting bigger,
in effect. Yeah, that's right. That's
essentially... They co-opt. You see, the middle
class, are supposed to be defined as the mechanic,
automobile mechanic, you see, who we would
consider working class. Because there's a
voluntary co-optation process at work, if I can
call it that. It was the guy who becomes a ,, a ,, an
intellectual, a journalist. The minute they get
the titulo, they become members of the upper
class, you see, rather than members of the group.
Now, we might define them on our standards in terms
of income as middle class, but they consider the
job, in my judgment, as well as the upper class.
Jose Luis is a good example. And this is supported
by what you know from this particular area. Yeah, I
would think so, yeah. I'm curious. You know what
I'd like for you to do? Professor, when you do go to
Mexico, and I hope you go for a long enough time to
have it soak in, like a month or two, I'd like for you
to keep a diary. A very impressionistic diary,
because I think it could be a very fascinating
thing. I'm sure, yeah. I've done diaries, you
know, from time to time. I suppose like most people
who start a diary, they let them lapse very, very
soon. I've not thought about it. You seem to have a
very different image of Mexico.
What was that?
Oh, and then after that, after I'd already paid my
fees, I put my card packet over to turn it in. The
dear little lady sitting there collecting the
card packet says, oh, well, you'll have to take it
over to housing and get your housing card stamped
before I can take your card packet. I've already
paid my fees. She says, yes, but you have to go to
housing. So I had to go to housing. And for the
umpteenth year in time, I have the permission to be
on campus.
One o'clock. I'm only making beds this morning.
Yes.
You
want to put it on? No, not that hand.
That
is crazy. Some guy had it. I don't remember.
What's the towel doing on the tape recorder?
What?
What? Where's the little plug?